the role that anti communist ideologies
anti-communist mythology plays in
shaping the way the CIA does what it
does we have with us two people
eminently suitable for that discussion
one who was a case officer for the CIA
and one who was an agent for the CIA my
right is Philip Agee who spent some 12
years in the CIA as a case officer
primarily in Latin America in Mexico
Uruguay Ecuador and well I was going to
say the man who started it all the first
person who ever left the CIA and talked
about it and although the mainstream
media may refer to Philip Agee as a
renegade which is their favorite word
for us I think he was a godsend
indeed he began a noble tradition that
people like Ralph McGehee and john
stockwell and others have joined and we
can only hope that more and more people
who serve in the more brutal branches of
the American government will find the
moral revulsion that Phil Agee found and
come out of the closet and tell us about
it move it away from it's too close
sorry someone told me to put it close ok
it was Alex spreading disinformation on
my left is another hero of this same
sort head Girja Mauro was a well-known
Nicaraguan the descendant of four
Nicaraguan presidents one of the
tomorrow's they're all they're all
related to each other and one who for
whatever reasons of misunderstanding
fled Nicaragua at the time of the
triumph of the Sandinista revolution
went to Miami where a short time later
he was approached by the CIA and
recruited to join the Contra leadership
Edgar had worked among other jobs in
public relations in Nicaragua and the
CIA thought he would not be an ideal
person to become a spokesman for the
Contras to become a public relations
leader for the Contras
Edgar also was a Jesuit priest who had
actually spent time assigned to a church
in the Bronx and had been Dean of the
Jesuit University in Managua and had
been a professor of philosophy
these were not the occupations that
impressed the CIA as much of course as
his public relations background but I
think those were the occupations that
ultimately caused him also to see the
moral problems with what he was doing to
see the lies that he was doing and to
learn firsthand how he was being used so
we have a user and an uzi with us today
and I think it will it will help give a
broad perspective of the way the CIA
works in the way it uses anti-communism
we're going to allow half the time this
afternoon for questions and I will begin
now by turning the floor over to Philip
Agee I don't want to start out by
insulting anyone but I have a feeling
that I started out as a young man like
many of you I was brought up and
educated to respect the institutions of
the United States the political economic
social system I was in fact a a
privileged beneficiary of this system
my father was a successful businessman
and I grew up in a a kind of a country
club environment I went to private
schools Jesuits in high school then on
to the University of Notre Dame it was
during my final year there that the CIA
came and approached me asked me to go
into what they considered to be their
most important training program well I
had the perfect profile for that during
those 1950's because I had gone through
the high school period and the
university period in late forties up
through the mid 50s this was the period
as everyone knows of Joe McCarthy at the
McCarthy period and also the height of
the war the the Cold War and I was in
fact a true believer in the crusade in
holy war
communism all of my formation had been
typical anti-communist of that period
and so it was only natural that someone
with this background accept the CIA's
recruitment and at age 22 I was in the
CIA beginning to go about the work to
preserve the United States this best of
all possible worlds from the Menace of
Soviet expansionism and world communist
threats one of the reasons I was able to
do this so easily was that I received my
university degree an honours degree in
fact in philosophy but I didn't have any
education at all no political education
and it wasn't until I went down to Latin
America which began in 1960 I was 25
then having completed the CIA's training
course and some military service at age
25 down in South America undercover as a
US diplomat taking over operations which
my predecessor had been running and
being under pressure as is every CIA
operations officer in the field pressure
to develop new operations to do this you
have to learn to speak the language you
have to be able to circulate in as wide
as fear as possible
where the potential recruits are this
means undertaking all kinds of leisure
activities I played a lot of golf at
that point there are others who are do a
lot of fishing all these activities
which will bring a person into contact
with the people who were the CIA is
interested in recruiting in fact my last
job in the CIA was just that I was sent
down to Mexico in 1917 67 as the United
States Olympic attache for the 68 games
in fact I'm still a CIA officer but that
was my cover I went down a
year-and-a-half before the games and my
job was to look around among all these
several thousand people in the Olympic
organizing menu
a year and a half before the games in
order to spot and assess those who would
be most useful to the Mexico City CIA
program
well eventually having seen the
realities of Latin America haven't seen
the results of our work that is that we
were supporting the traditional power
structures in Latin America we were
supporting what is known as the
oligarchy
despite all the talk of reform of that
period in the early sixties you know
Kennedy established what was called the
Alliance for Progress and there was
going to be a great infusion of capital
and technology to Latin America in order
to ease these prevailing social and
economic and justices which everyone
agreed were atrocious this was going to
be done through economic growth and on
the Latin American side they were going
to install reforms to ease these anjaan
in justices such things as fiscal reform
land reform and so forth but the more I
was down there and particularly with the
invasion of the Dominican Republic in
1965 I came to the conclusion little by
little that all that talk about reform
was nothing was just that mostly talk
and in fact no country in Latin America
save Cuba which was the enemy still had
changed their societies in any
meaningful way so I decided I would
leave the CIA both for those political
reasons and for personal reasons it
happened that my wife and I had
separated we were in process of having a
divorce I had gone down to Mexico alone
and it fell to me to work with a certain
person in the organizing organizing
committee for the Olympic Games
who had been assigned to work with the
u.s. embassy and it happened that this
person was very attractive and thought
that Che Guevara was the most wonderful
man in the world we fell in love and I
had a double deception to handle for the
wresting for the remaining months in the
CIA I couldn't tell them about her and
her politics or
especially of our politics because
because they would have considered that
to be a security threat and of course I
could never tell her about the CIA or my
participation in it because she had
never seen me she would never spoken to
me again
well I left the the agency for both
those personal and political reasons and
with the idea of simply starting a new
life forgetting all about that work I'd
done before in the agency and in fact I
rolled in the National University of
Mexico and a doctoral program in Latin
American history and culture with the
idea of coming back to the United States
perhaps to teach well I was in this
program and it was kind of in this in
this study and it was a radicalizing
experience because I was learning more
and more about the realities in history
of Latin America and where my work had
played a role a contemporary role in
these matters and within a year after
leaving the agency I began to think the
unthinkable
those old pressures of disciplines of
secrecy and security consciousness had
faded away or beginning to fade and I
began to think about the possibility of
a book well all this has to do with
coming to grips with this anti-communism
with which I had grown up that because
the CIA was established back in 1947 as
an action arm of the president without a
policy of its own it is told it does
what it is told to do by the President
of the United States that is what the
law says and that is the way it has
always been up to the 1980s that is the
kaci Reagan years when they tried to
establish this off the shelf off the
books capability but anti-communism
naturally was the justification for
everything practically that the CIA does
even though in many cases the objects of
our operations are far from being
communists take one boss for example in
the Dominican Republic
take Salvador Allende in Chile take
goulart in Brazil in the early 1960s
take Mossadegh who was an anti-communist
he was a nationalist
anti-communism though is used as the
emotional rubric in political rubric
actually to cover and to justify these
subversive operations abroad they have
subversive in the sense that from the
very beginning the CIA has used money
and control over people to seek control
over the so-called free pluralistic
democratic institutions of other
countries this is what it became known
as covered action it began at the very
beginning at the first meeting of the
National Security Council in 1947
following the passage of the National
Security Act which established the CIA
and the National Security Council the
NSC has the highest policymaking body in
matters of Foreign Affairs and national
security chaired by the President of the
United States having a statutory members
the vice-president the secretaries of
state and defense and various other
high-level officials including the
director of what today is known had a
different name then but what today is
known as the Federal Emergency
Management Agency FEMA the CIA is simply
an instrument and has been offered these
years an instrument of this National
Security Council and the President
himself it has no policy of a tone of
its own it does not make policy at the
very first meeting of the NSC the
decision was taken to set aside ten
million dollars
a huge amount of money in those days for
secret intervention by the CIA in the
Italian election coming up in April 1948
the fear in Washington was that the
coalition of socialists communists and
others would win the elections after all
they had been the backbone of some
twenty of resistance to some twenty
years of fascism in Italy and now in the
first national elections following
liberation by the Allies in 1944 the
Italian people might give victory to the
left and so this ten million dollars was
passed in through front organizations in
Italy through Italian American
organizations in this country through
the Vatican and the result was the
Christian Democrats won very easily
it's hard to measure and determine in
any of these types of operations what
difference the money made but there was
euphoria in Washington and the
bureaucratic machinery was then set up
to continue and expand these operations
this type of thing worldwide and not
only in electoral processes but in the
institutions of power of countries all
around the world and these institutions
are the political parties of course the
government's the military and security
services the trade unions youth and
student organizations women's groups
religion cultural and professional
societies and in a very big way the
public information media it's done
through infiltrating or recruiting
people indigenous people inside these
organizations giving them money for the
organization but also paying them a
salary as a control factor control is a
word that every CI a trainee learns
early on it means long range control of
the natural resources the labor and the
markets of other countries but it also
means control over individuals and those
personal salaries are a control factor
every CIA agent and I'm not talking
about myself I'm talking about agents
who are the indigenous people working
for the agency as opposed to the staff
officer which I was the agents are
supposed to do exactly what they're told
to do with the money they're given and
this is a factor as I say which every CI
a trainee learns at the beginning well
the purpose of these covered action
operations was to affect events in a
given country they were as I
demonstrated with the Italian election
they were from the very beginning going
on and they continued on until today
there has never been a pause in these
kinds of operations and under the Reagan
administration of course they've been
very strongly emphasized and given
generous funding around the world
well it wasn't until much much later in
my life that I began to understand that
anti communism was you
to cover or to justify all of these
types of activities when in actual fact
the objects or victims of these
activities were not in many cases
communists at all they were nationalists
they were populist they were perhaps
socialists but I began to ask myself at
one point why is it that social or
popular revolution in an impoverished
country is such a threat to the United
States because almost by definition of
the anti-communist political culture in
which we live any popular revolution is
a threat to the United States communist
ism is a very dangerous label I
eventually learned it's used to to
discredit any revolutionary movement it
has been used and I used it myself
constantly to discredit any popular
revolutionary movement that seeks
revolutionary change or fundamental
radical change in favor of the poor
people and in the so called third world
you know these are the vast majorities
of the populations in Nicaragua or El
Salvador Guatemala anywhere in Latin
America the tradition has been that most
of the good arable land has been
cornered or brought under control
through ownership by a very few families
and the vast majority of the rural
population the peasants are if not
totally marginalized from the money
economy certainly they are living a
subhuman existence and if they have any
plots of land at all it is normally the
money funding a problem that is plots
that are too small to be economical
these so-called oligarchies are the
merchants the bankers the the commercial
interests and they are all over Latin
America and as I said before we were the
people who were most supporting them and
they were the people who during the
1960's were most opposed to nd basic
fundamental reforms well getting back to
the question of why social revolution is
a threat to the United States I think
the analysis has to come back to the
United States itself when asking the
question why is it by definition a
threat to the United States it reminded
me of when I was a trainee in the CIA I
was taught or we were taught that the
Soviet Union's foreign policy that is
its belligerence and its expansionism
abroad was a product of its internal
system namely the requirements of the
Soviet Union the Soviet of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union to maintain a
monopoly on power in that country and I
think most political scientists would
agree that any societies or nations
foreign policy is largely determined or
a product significantly of its internal
system and that is why in trying to
raise the question and get students for
example as I'm touring around
universities to ask themselves the
questions of why is it that all this
political repression is necessary is it
in our interest or is it in the
interests of just a few people in the
United States well yes now how is that
any better right maybe this is not even
on I don't know all right well I try to
speak louder
I don't know if this one's that's no
better either is it alright well I'll
just speak louder than what I want to do
this when I go around is to talk about
what the CIA does a little bit and that
is the subversion of these democratic
institutions because to the to the
degree that the CIA penetrates and
controls an electoral process or a
political party or a trade union to that
degree that institution is unfree so
it's a subversion of the free nature of
these institutions that's one thing the
second thing is the paramilitary
operations which are designed to destroy
a revolutionary movement through
terrorism that is the type of thing that
we find in the Contra operation in these
recent years during the Reagan period
but there is a third type of operation
which is just as bad probably worse than
any of those and this third type of
operation is known as liaison operations
liaison operations are all those
activities undertaken again in the name
of anti-communism with the local
security services of foreign countries
around the world they started with the
British right after right as soon as the
CIA was established and then they went
on around the world
the CIA even set up in many countries
security services as instruments for
political control as in Greece following
the civil war there the K Y P as in
South Korea the KCIA as in Iran the
South map and so forth
now these security services are some of
the nastiest services that anyone will
find anywhere they are for example the
guatemalan services that the CIA has
worked with hand-in-glove since the CIA
provoked overthrow of the arbenz
government in 1954 nobody knows for sure
how many but they're educated guesses
are that something between 100,000 and
150,000 people have been murdered in
that country since that CIA sponsored
coup more than 30 years ago
you know Salvador alone you get
something like 70,000 people kidnapped
tortured to death and their bodies
thrown along the roads since the Reagan
support Pro
began on the other hand you have El
Salvador I mean Nicaragua where the
casualty figures now stands at up around
70,000 people around 20,000 dead and
50,000 wounded the comparable figure for
the United States with a population
eighty times that of Nicaragua is
something like five and a half million
casualties once I went down to the US
Embassy in Madrid to the library and I
added up the casualty figures for every
war in which the United States has been
involved for the last 100 years and the
casualty figure the total figure comes
to less than half the comparable figure
for Nicaragua 1.9 million I think it was
so you see what a calamity this war this
terrorist war this fomenting a civil war
in Nicaragua has been for them it has
been disastrous and the human cost of
these 50,000 people for example who have
survived their wounds but many of whom
many many have lost arms and legs to
live the rest of their life like that
well the question is why do we have a
government well how do we tolerate that
we do these things abroad or that we
allow a government to do these things we
allow Reagan to carry on this activity
and then go on television with the smile
and say I'm a contra to you know that is
simply disgusting and I think part of
the answer or a hint to the answer to
why we allow this why it's not much of
an issue in this country generally comes
in a poll on Americans attitudes toward
the government of El Salvador published
just a few months ago it was a poll
conducted by market opinion research in
Detroit which I think is related to the
Republicans party remember El Salvador
is a country that has received three and
a half billion dollars from the Reagan
administration since 1981 it receives a
million and a half dollars every day of
some which annually exceeds the whole
Salvadoran national budget the
government budget it is halted or it is
praised by this administration all its
propaganda organs as the showcase for
the raisin program Reagan Bush program
of restoring democracy in Central
America well what do Americans think of
this government 15% of Americans only
15% think that El Salvador has
democratic government despite all the
government propaganda around the 1984
elections the support the Duarte you
know the CIA passed in millions of
dollars to get party elected in 1980 for
and as a matter of fact he is according
to many reports he's been on the CIA
payroll for many years 15 percent only
believe that El Salvador has a
democratic government 33 percent of
Americans don't have the slightest idea
what kind of government El Salvador has
but then the great revelations according
to this poll 35 percent of Americans
believe that al Salvador has a
pro-soviet government it doesn't say
what the remaining 17 percent believe
but it wouldn't surprise me if they had
Duarte confused with Khomeini and said
as Salvador has lamech fundamentalist
government well you know it's really
ignorant its apathy its disinterest on
the part of us Americans generally
speaking certainly not the people of
this conference but generally speaking
that allows Reagan to get away with this
and will probably allow Bush to do the
same because I have been searching and
talking to people looking for
indications that the bush program would
be any different from the Reagan program
and so far I haven't found a word that
means that this human cost is going to
be continuing people are going to keep
on dying down there and it could get
much worse in El Salvador as a matter of
fact I stopped now in just a moment but
I want to mention the FEMA program the
recs 84 I know a lot of you know about
this it was a program drawn up in the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in
the early 1980s in the event that the
United States had to introduce troops to
El Salvador or invaded Nicaragua the
government or that is the reagan-bush
administration anticipated riots big
street demonstrations a lot of civil
divil disorder in protest against that
invasion of Central America they drew up
a document whereby and a plan whereby
the president
his pen would suspend the Constitution
establish as commander-in-chief martial
law in this country and hundreds of
thousands of people would be rounded up
and interned on military reservations I
think they selected twelve or fourteen
military bases where people would be put
without trial without charges just on
ice to get them off the streets now in
the plan that I've read about supposedly
these were going to be undocumented
Latin Americans but an actual fact you
know is going to be every one of us who
went out on the street well that plan of
course is still sitting there for the
president's signature we're that close
to fascism in this country because
that's what a military dictatorship
would be there would be more and more
racism you know more and more sin or
phobia and so forth well the problem is
that it's not only that we're lucky
everybody's lucky I think that the
invasions never happened but that
doesn't mean they can't happen under
Bush because the Salvadoran situation is
getting worse and worse the political
repression is getting greater there were
more des quad assassinations during the
first five months of this year than all
of last year and the popular
organizations are growing again in
strength and taking to the streets
students trade unionists and so forth
and peasant organizations these people
are being selected out or that is chosen
for selected assassination by the
military and the death squads which is
the same thing practically there and as
butch comes into office and as this
situation gets worse with the election
scheduled for March when arena is likely
to take power or at least that it said
that they could well take power from the
Christian Democrats who are all divided
in and as corrupt as they've ever been
that means that the situation in
salvador for the united states is going
to deteriorate and it already is
deteriorating the FMN the correlation
between the FMLN force and the
government military force is going
against the government it's going
against the military the FMLN is all
dispersed in smaller units and it makes
sense that has forced the military to do
the same thing which makes those
military units all the more vulnerable
and so the war goes on in a more
favorable fashion for the revolutionary
forces well what is going to do about
that we were going to reach probably
within the first couple of years of the
bush
raishin the danger again that troops
might have to be introduced to El
Salvador and perhaps an invasion of
Nicaragua who knows because the contra
has not been able to do it the only
other alternative if you want to solve
things by force is military so this
document of FEMA is very important we
may be on the verge of that in very few
years thank you all very much for your
attention
Thank You Flo now we will turn the floor
over to Edgar Chamorro last week I
watched in TV the story told by himself
mr. le whistle or whistle the man of the
Holocaust who have been writing so many
books that story and he was very candid
you know saying that after he went
through the horror he didn't want to
talk at all about it until mr. Francois
Maria persuaded him once he was a guest
of him stay with him and told him he
told the story that Maria is a Christian
or Catholic and you see it was talking
about Jesus Christ suffering so much and
so I said well mouriak back and forth
with Jesus Christ offering a Jesus
Christ and Jesus Christ so he said
finally I have to give it back to him
you know with this Jesus Christ
suffering you know so much so he told
him that he thought that the Jewish
people suffer much more than Jesus
Christ and that and Maria walked away
and then finally stopped him look at him
sis did you feel like that why don't you
go out and talk about it it says that
that make him think that it's important
to talk about things that we don't like
to I tell you this story because I just
watched this in TV and he pressed me
because it's very hard to go around
talking about this this is all my first
year I am NOT doing too much thanks God
this year but the yell of the rain
trying to get 270 million he tried to
help the second time after the hundred
million so I was invited with many
groups to go and talk it's very hard you
know because the weather I am finding
very frustrating is that the more you
talk the more you get caught in this
kind of I don't know how you call it you
know like a game plan
it fits the other side and we got
nowhere and the people in Aqaba keep
suffering so every
right this time I accept of course you
know a bill shop and Ellen rate in the
media Institute were the first people
when I left the the contrast that came
to visit me and they invited me to write
my story he thought it was important for
me was very painful to you know living
through that again how you because you
have to really go through your life you
know I think what did I do that
I mean why I let these people use me and
what's wrong with me I mean after all
you know because anytime you do
something like that you are questioning
yourself your character your personality
your intelligence your your manic what
integrity what song or why you were so
stupid or so a fool you know so it
becomes a very painful and I want to say
that because I am going through that
kind of crisis you know I don't even
want to talk about it too much
but I think it's important you know at
least once in awhile I accept
first to go to the World Court with an
affidavit I said well that will do it
you know nobody will ask me again you
know because he's written there go on
read my affidavit please don't don't
want to talk about it but know the more
once you do something like that the
press calm they're good people writing
good books you know there are like 20
books on the contrast and the way did I
stay had been deceived and so on out
there and I can see myself in many of
those not even quoted many time but I am
there on some tight full chapters you
know but the real point I want to say
that once you go out to top then people
come more and then they're reporters
articles people who are writing for
history or for the media of TV and so on
I'll you know you are being used again
you know and then I decided I am going
back to Nicaragua
of course I was to use me too you know
and I have a problem with this thing
about using people I think I am coming
to different called traveling with the
instrumentalization of people
yeah I I think it's a key element at
least in the extreme left what I call
the extreme left the very radical and
the extreme right I have been trying to
find myself in the center you know what
I don't know what is the center because
it's very relative you know
when I was criticizing Ryan bring so
much to you right that I might be a
radical leftist you know because he's so
mostly right he makes me look too much
to the left you know now they bring
somebody they color a mother you know
like well he could be more more but what
does it mean that you know also you know
so I am I am finding that one of the
problems is this instrumentalization of
people the form is very hard to keep
talking and because I think the one of
the element we got in the stab of CIA
and I believe also or some of the
extreme governments that we call of the
left radical is this concept of man that
is is to be used no I have seen many
movements of the left using people I'm a
movement of the right and so on so I
said that because you know I'm going to
have particular crisis
I am indeed not really seeing the
usefulness but I think okay I wanted to
start with those words of mr. Elie
Wiesel
that it's important to talk because of
the horror you know the horror and I
think that a intellectuals academics
analysts like to make things in
abstracts arrived myself in I have here
you know the very austere outline not
and but the polling is how to translate
to you the pain of be news be crafting
is important for me the more reversing a
thing I felt when I accepted money from
the Sierra I guess that makes you a
recruited person was you accept money
first
you know I felt I
was not recruited that the CI was
working for me because my ego my
personality says no I mean the United
State we can use them to go back to
power should McCallum power strongly
tomorrow's want to go back to power my
my group my aristocratic blood my elite
group my veteran we want to go back to
power and we'll use the United States
and this song was that also so I I said
well we'll use them but you really find
out that you're not using them they are
just using you because in any moment
that you want to have an influence in in
in the movement or to be independent you
are cut off from meetings or from money
or from whatever you know or just they
make you believe that you are somebody
you are not you are they still flatter
you that the media they need you face
the middle you name the middle you you
to be a victim maybe you know or to be a
martyr you know they need you hey I want
to jump to another experience was very
painful for me I was but made me live
really when I had to work with this CIA
case officer who brought the manual on
psychological operation I believe is a
very important book to read for
Americans if they were to understand
what is the CIA all about that little
book called the manual on-site ops you
know is totally not anti-communist is
the communist in the purest sense of the
word manual where all the techniques or
all the tactics or whatever expertise
that have been accumulated not to force
people to recruit people to embarrass
people to humiliate people to Marty lies
people to victimize people are there so
you know that
companions you know of these tactics was
brought by the CL to me and I was
responsible because I was the PR man at
the same time I was in charge of the of
the political education and the need for
a political education came that the
Contras were being trained by by
Argentinians who were I mean for the
military who preferred in tinea again
you know a very persistent group really
who who had a very you know simplistic
approach to things so very brutal and
very cruel and in some discussion I have
been you know visiting contrasting and
talking to to the soldiers being
training and ask them why do you fight
I like if I ask you you know why do you
come here me so they didn't know why
they were fighting I said but what would
you tell people once you take a guitar I
mean you are not at all
you finish shooting people there are a
few survivors you know there is a woman
there and a man there a child what do
you tell them you victorious country you
walk into a hotel what is your line not
a word
I mean these people were just trying to
kill you know to destroy to damage by
yourself but this sandanista I tried to
offend you I remember son in stuff from
school I mean they were full of idea did
to write paper they were using DTOs a
lot of ideas in their head I mean a lot
of ideas on paper writing and talking to
people and grass roots everywhere
grassroots okay but the Contras don't
have anything this is the political
platform to have a plan have you ever
heard a controller talking about
political education about schools once
they take over have you heard a few
control it was it was an idea so I I
said you know what I mean I was
embarrassed in the CIA's office except
why do you do we need so I got the idea
when as far as Washington I think a
particle so they said you know
we need to give them a little book you
know so the guideline I made the joke
you know we need like my red book or
qaddafi green book we need but I call it
that I'm a blue book and I start working
with my own little blue book that in
some places there but the trial that was
that they sent of this black book called
the psychological operations manual
something taken from for Brad story so
it's very important and saying for you
people to read that and I see that that
book is about instrumentalization brutal
simplistic instrumentalization when you
create martyrs you assassinate Georgia's
you selectively of course you know no
random killing you know the great
advance in education the United States
it from random killing to selective
killing you know so that those are the
the qualitative changes you know that
make difference between deterministic
societies materialistic society and
democratic societies where there is a
higher degree of sophistication of a of
you